# SI 506 Lecture 14

## Topics

1. Challenges

## 1.0 Data

The following data sets are drawn from the the
[Center for Disease Control and Prevention](https://www.cdc.gov/) (CDC) and the
[National Center for Health Statistics](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/index.htm) (NCHS).

Before commencing the challenges review the data contained in the following files:

| File | Source | Description |
| :--- | :----- | :---------- |
| `mi-covid-washtenaw-202111.csv` | [CDC](https://data.cdc.gov/Public-Health-Surveillance/United-States-COVID-19-County-Level-of-Community-T/8396-v7yb) | COVID-19 county level community transmission levels for Washtenaw County (home of Ann Arbor) |
| `mi-covid-vax_counties-202111.csv` | [CDC](https://data.cdc.gov/Vaccinations/COVID-19-Vaccinations-in-the-United-States-County/8xkx-amqh) | COVID-19 county level vaccination rates for Michigan counties located within two counties of either Macomb or Wayne counties, inclusive. |
| `mi-nchs-urban_rural_codes.csv` | [NCHS](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/urban_rural.htm) | Urban/rural classification scheme for U.S. counties and county-equivalent entities (2013) |

Examine each file. Note how the data is structured. Determine which "columns" permit the data to be
linked. Inspect the string values and consider which values can/ought to be cast to a different type
(e.g. string -> integer).

A test fixture CSV file is also provided:

* fxt-vax_ur_countries.csv

You will replicate this file (assigning it a different name).

## 1.1 Comparing files

Each test fixture CSV file (prefixed with `fxt_`)  represents the correct file output that _must_
be generated by the program you write. Use them at periodic intervals to compare your current output
against the expected output.

:bulb: In VS Code you can compare or "diff" the file you generate against the appropriate test
fixture file. After calling the `write_csv` function and generating a new file do the following:

1. Hover over the file with your cursor then right click and choose the "Select for Compare" option.

2. Next, hover over the appropriate test fixture file then right click and choose the "Compare with
   Selected" option.

3. Lines highlighted in red indicate character and/or indention mismatches. If any mismatches are
   encountered revise your code, close the comparison pane, revise your code, regenerate your file,
   and compare it again to the test fixture file. Repeat as necessary until the files match.

:exclamation: Your output __must__ match each fixture file line for line and character for
character. Review these files; they are akin to answer keys and should be utilized for comparison
purposes as you work your way through the assignment.

## 2.0 Challenges

## Challenge 01

1. In the `main` function block, call the function `read_csv` to retrieve the data from the file
   `mi-covid-washtenaw-202111.csv`. Assign the
   return value to a variable named `wash_data`.

2. Use indexing (no loops of any kind) to return the `wash_data` list element with the highest
   reported test positivity percentage over the previous seven (7) days (e.g. column
   "percent_test_results_reported_positive_last_7_days") and assign the value of the expression
   to a variable named `max_pos_tests`.

3. Use slicing (no loops of any kind) to return all elements that contain data for the week 07-13
   November 2021 and assign the value of the expression to a variable named `week_02`.

4. Use slicing (no loops of any kind) to reverse the order of the list and assign the value of the
   expression to a variable named `reverse_order`.

5. BONUS: Use slicing (no loops of any kind) to reverse the order of the daily record elements only,
   excluding the "header" row (1st element). Assign the slice to a variable named
   `wash_data_reversed`. Then add the `wash_data` "header' element as the first element in the new
   list.

   ```python
   wash_data_reversed = [
      ['state_name', 'county_name', 'fips_code', 'report_date', 'cases_per_100K_7_day_count_change', 'percent_test_results_reported_positive_last_7_days', 'community_transmission_level'], ['Michigan', 'Washtenaw County', '26161', '2021/11/20', '409.410', '6.67', 'high'],
      ...
      ['Michigan', 'Washtenaw County', '26161', '2021/11/01', '159.410', '3.50', 'high']
      ]
   ```

## Challenge 02

__Task__: Retrieve the CDC data and implement a function that can return a nested list representing
a county from the `vax_counties` list.

1. In the `main` function block, call the `read_csv` function and retrieve the Center for Disease
   Control (CDC) county vaccination rates contained in the file `mi-covid-vax_counties-202111.csv`
   for select Michigan counties. Assign the return value to a variable named `vax_data`.

2. The "headers" row constitutes the first element in `vax_data`. Access the element and assign
   it to a variable named `vax_headers`.

3. Next access the remaining "row" elements and assign them to a variable named `vax_counties`.

   :exclamation: Recall that individual data elements accessed from a CSV file will be imported as
   strings. Some strings may need to be converted to a different data type in the challenges below.

4. Implement the function named `get_county`. The function defines two parameters: `counties`
   (`list`) and `county_name` (`str`). Review the function's docstring for more information about
   the function's expected behavior.

   :bulb: the `counties` list contains nested list elements, each of which represents a Michigan
   county and its county-specific vaccination data.

5. After implementing `get_county` return to the `main` function. Call the function passing it the
   `vax_counties` list and the string "washtenaw county" (lower case required). Assign the return
   value to a variable named `washtenaw_cty`.

## Challenge 03

__Task__. Implement a function that permits retrieval of any county element using the CSV "headers"
row as an index value lookup mechanism.

1. Implement the function `get_attribute`. The function defines three parameters:
   `county` (`list`), `headers` (`list`), and `column_name` (`str`). Review the docstring to better
   understand the function's expected behavior.

   Once implemented you can then employ the function to return any single
   county attribute (e.g., Series_Complete_Pop_Pct, Series_Complete_12Plus,
   Series_Complete_65PlusPop_Pct) by leveraging the CSV's "headers" row of column names to look up
   the element's index value.

   :bulb: This function can be implemented with one line of code.

2. After implementing `get_attribute` return to the `main` function. Call the function
   `get_attribute` and retrieve the "Series_Complete_Pop_Pct" value for Washtenaw county by passing
   the appropriate arguments to the function (i.e., `washtenaw_cty`, `vax_headers`, etc.). Assign
   the return value to a variable named `washtenaw_cty_vax_complete_pct`.

   :bulb: The "Series_Complete_Pop_Pct" value represents a county's vaccination completion status
   (e.g., percent value of fully vaccinated residents).

## Challenge 04

__Task__: Convert CDC floating point numbers represented as strings to type  `float`.

1. Implement the function named `convert_to_float`. The function defines a single parameter:
   `county` (`list`). Review the docstring to better understand the function's expected behavior.
   The following table lists CDC data that should be converted to a `float`.

   | Column name | type | convert to |
   | :---------- | :--- | :--------- |
   | Series_Complete_Pop_Pct | `str` | `float` |
   | Series_Complete_12PlusPop_Pct | `str` | `float` |
   | Series_Complete_18PlusPop_Pct | `str` | `float` |
   | Series_Complete_65PlusPop_Pct | `str` | `float` |

   In the function block choose a `for` loop that facilitates assigning a new value to a list
   element.

   Employ conditional statements in tandem with the function `is_floating_point_number` (provided)
   to determine whether or not a string represents a floating point number.

      * If a string represents a floating point number (i.e., a number with a fractional component)
        convert the string to a `float` and assign it to the corresponding element.

      * Otherwise, do not mutate the element.

   :bulb: Recall that an `if` statement can include a call to a function that returns a boolean
   value.

2. After implementing `convert_to_float` return to the `main` function. Loop over the
   `vax_counties` list and inside the loop block call `convert_to_float` in order to "clean" each
   county's floating point number data values.

## Challenge 05

__Task__: Identify "outlier" counties with vaccination rates for adults aged 18+ that are either
less than fifty percent (50%) or greater than seventy percent (70%).

1. Create an empty accumulator list named `outliers`.

2. Loop over `vax_counties`. In the function block call `get_attribute` and retrieve the
   "Series_Complete_18PlusPop_Pct" value for each county. If the county's vaccination rate is either
   less than fifty percent (50%) or greater than seventy percent (70%), append the county to the
   `outliers` list.

   :bulb: The `continue` statement should prove useful for solving this challenge.

## Challenge 06

__Task__: Retrieve the NCHS data and implement a function to retrieve the Urban/Rural codes.
Incorporate the codes into the `vax_counties` list and write the new list to a file.

1. In the `main` function, call the `read_csv` function and retrieve the National Center for Health
   Statistics (NCHS) urban/rural county codes contained in the file `mi-nchs-urban_rural_codes.csv`
   for select Michigan counties. Assign the return value to a variable named `nchs_codes_data`.

2. Access the "row" elements (exclude the "header" row) and assign them to a variable named
   `nchs_codes`.

3. Implement the function named `get_nchs_code`. The function defines two parameters:
   `nchs_codes` (`list`) and `county` (`list`). Review the function's docstring for more information
   about the function's expected behavior.

   :bulb: Note that the function returns a `tuple` comprising a county's NCHS urban/rural code and
   the urban/rural code descriptor.

4. After implementing `get_nchs_code` return to the `main` function. Implement a `for i in range()`
   loop sync'd to the length of `vax_counties`. Inside the loop block call `get_nchs_code` and
   unpack the return value (`< ur_code >, < ur_code_name >)` and assign the items to two variables
   (names re your choice). Then mutate the county list by placing the UR Code and UR Code Name in
   the 5th and 6th positions in the list.

5. Likewise, mutate the `vax_headers` list by placing the strings "UR_Code" and "UR_ Code_Name" in
   the 5th and 6th positions in the list.

6. Call the function `write_csv` and pass to it as arguments the filepath
   `stu-vax_ur_counties.csv`, `vax_counties`, and `vax_headers`. Compare your output file to the
   test fixture file `fxt-vax_ur_counties.csv`. Both files _must_ match, line for line, and
   character for character.
